Why benchmarking in bioinformatics?
-----------------------------------

Benchmarking consists of measuring the performance of some physical
process under the same conditions by using specific indicators that
depend on the field, resulting in one or more values that are then
compared to others. Nowadays, it is used in almost every field, from
business and finances to industry and computation. In computation,
benchmarking can be performed from a technical, functional and/or
scientific perspective. The more aspects are considered (e.g. technical,
scientific, functional) when comparing software, the better the
evaluation of the software being compared.

It is well known among the science community that bioinformatics is an
important emerging field. There has been a huge explosion in the amount
of health and biological data during the last 20 years, and also in the
amount of software available: there is an urgent need of computational
methods, tools and databases in order to store, manage and extract
meaningful knowledge from that data.

In other words, the dependence of life scientists on software has
steadily grown in recent years: researchers at public institutions and
private enterprises all over the world are constantly developing new
computational resources and improving the existing ones to make life
sciences research more accurate, quicker and efficient. Thus, it is not
surprising that benchmarking has become an essential process within the
bioinformatics field; for many tasks, researchers have to decide which
of the available bioinformatics software are more suitable for their
specific needs and, if possible select the one that provides the highest
accuracy, the best efficiency and the highest level of reproducibility
when integrated in their research projects and/or daily practice. This
is nowadays widely utilized to analyze the efficiency of several
algorithms and/or workflows used for various purposes such as sequence
alignment, protein structure or/and orthology prediction among others.
